Classic Poetry Series




- poems -



Publication Date:

2004



PoemHunter.Com - The World’s Poetry Archive

Publisher:



A Girl

The tree has entered my hands,

The sap has ascended my arms,

The tree has grown in my breast -

Downward,

The branches grow out of me, like arms.

Tree you are,

Moss you are,

You are violets with wind above them.

A child - so high - you are,

And all this is folly to the world.





A Pact

I make a pact with you, Walt Whitman -

I have detested you long enough.

I come to you as a grown child

Who has had a pig-headed father;

I am old enough now to make friends.

It was you that broke the new wood,

Now is a time for carving.

We have one sap and one root -

Let there be commerce between us.





A Virginal

No, no! Go from me. I have left her lately.

I will not spoil my sheath with lesser brightness, For my surrounding air hath a new lightness; Slight are her arms, yet they have bound me straitly And left me cloaked as with a gauze of aether; As with sweet leaves; as with subtle clearness.

Oh, I have picked up magic in her nearness To sheathe me half in half the things that sheathe her.

No, no! Go from me. I have still the flavour, Soft as spring wind that’s come from birchen bowers.

Green come the shoots, aye April in the branches, As winter’s wound with her sleight hand she staunches, Hath of the trees a likeness of the savour: As white their bark, so white this lady’s hours.





Alba

As cool as the pale wet leaves

Tof lily-of-the-valley

She lay beside me in the dawn.





An Immorality

Sing we for love and idleness,

Naught else is worth the having.

Though I have been in many a land,

There is naught else in living.

And I would rather have my sweet,

Though rose-leaves die of grieving,

Than do high deeds in Hungary

To pass all men’s believing.





Ancient Music

Winter is icummen in,

Lhude sing Goddamm.

Raineth drop and staineth slop,

And how the wind doth ramm!

Sing: Goddamm.

Skiddeth bus and sloppeth us,

An ague hath my ham.

Freezeth river, turneth liver,

Damn you, sing: Goddamm.

Goddamm, Goddamm, ‘tis why I am, Goddamm, So ‘gainst the winter’s balm.

Sing goddamm, damm, sing Goddamm.

Sing goddamm, sing goddamm, DAMM.





And the days are not full enough

And the days are not full enough

And the nights are not full enough

And life slips by like a field mouse

Not shaking the grass





Ballad for Gloom

For God, our God is a gallant foe

That playeth behind the veil.

I have loved my God as a child at heart That seeketh deep bosoms for rest,

I have loved my God as a maid to man—

But lo, this thing is best:

To love your God as a gallant foe that plays behind the veil; To meet your God as the night winds meet beyond Arcturus’ pale.

I have played with God for a woman,

I have staked with my God for truth,

I have lost to my God as a man, clear-eyed—

His dice be not of ruth.

For I am made as a naked blade,

But hear ye this thing in sooth:

Who loseth to God as man to man

Shall win at the turn of the game.

I have drawn my blade where the lightnings meet But the ending is the same:

Who loseth to God as the sword blades lose Shall win at the end of the game.

For God, our God is a gallant foe that playeth behind the veil.

Whom God deigns not to overthrow hath need of triple mail.





Ballad of the Goodly Fere

Ha’ we lost the goodliest fere o’ all

For the priests and the gallows tree?

Aye lover he was of brawny men,

O’ ships and the open sea.

When they came wi’ a host to take Our Man His smile was good to see,

“First let these go!” quo’ our Goodly Fere, “Or I’ll see ye damned,” says he.

Aye he sent us out through the crossed high spears And the scorn of his laugh rang free,

“Why took ye not me when I walked about Alone in the town?” says he.

Oh we drank his “Hale” in the good red wine When we last made company,

No capon priest was the Goodly Fere

But a man o’ men was he.

I ha’ seen him drive a hundred men

Wi’ a bundle o’ cords swung free,

That they took the high and holy house

For their pawn and treasury.

They’ll no’ get him a’ in a book I think Though they write it cunningly;

No mouse of the scrolls was the Goodly Fere But aye loved the open sea.

If they think they ha’ snared our Goodly Fere They are fools to the last degree.

“I’ll go to the feast,” quo’ our Goodly Fere, “Though I go to the gallows tree.”

“Ye ha’ seen me heal the lame and blind, And wake the dead,” says he,

“Ye shall see one thing to master all:

‘Tis how a brave man dies on the tree.”

A son of God was the Goodly Fere

That bade us his brothers be.

I ha’ seen him cow a thousand men.

I have seen him upon the tree.

He cried no cry when they drave the nails And the blood gushed hot and free,

The hounds of the crimson sky gave tongue But never a cry cried he.

I ha’ seen him cow a thousand men

On the hills o’ Galilee,




They whined as he walked out calm between, Wi’ his eyes like the grey o’ the sea,

Like the sea that brooks no voyaging

With the winds unleashed and free,

Like the sea that he cowed at Genseret

Wi’ twey words spoke’ suddently.

A master of men was the Goodly Fere,

A mate of the wind and sea,

If they think they ha’ slain our Goodly Fere They are fools eternally.

I ha’ seen him eat o’ the honey-comb

Sin’ they nailed him to the tree.





Before Sleep

The lateral vibrations caress me,

They leap and caress me,

They work pathetically in my favour,

They seek my financial good.

She of the spear stands present.

The gods of the underworld attend me, O Annubis, These are they of thy company.

With a pathetic solicitude they attend me; Undulant,

Their realm is the lateral courses.



Light!

I am up to follow thee, Pallas.

Up and out of their caresses.

You were gone up as a rocket,

Bending your passages from right to left and from left to right In the flat projection of a spiral.

The gods of drugged sleep attend me,

Wishing me well;

I am up to follow thee, Pallas.





Cantico del Sole

The thought of what America would be like If the Classics had a wide circulation

Troubles my sleep,

The thought of what America,

The thought of what America,The thought of what America would be like If the Classics had a wide circulation

Troubles my sleep.

Nunc dimittis, now lettest thou thy servant, Now lettest thou thy servant

Depart in peace.

The thought of what America,

The thought of what America,

The thought of what America would be like If the Classics had a wide circulation…

Oh well!

It troubles my sleep.





Canto 1

And then went down to the ship,

Set keel to breakers, forth on the godly sea, and We set up mast and sail on that swart ship, Bore sheep aboard her, and our bodies also Heavy with weeping, and winds from sternward Bore us onward with bellying canvas,

Crice’s this craft, the trim-coifed goddess.

Then sat we amidships, wind jamming the tiller, Thus with stretched sail, we went over sea till day’s end.

Sun to his slumber, shadows o’er all the ocean, Came we then to the bounds of deepest water, To the Kimmerian lands, and peopled cities Covered with close-webbed mist, unpierced ever With glitter of sun-rays

Nor with stars stretched, nor looking back from heaven Swartest night stretched over wreteched men there.

The ocean flowing backward, came we then to the place Aforesaid by Circe.

Here did they rites, Perimedes and Eurylochus, And drawing sword from my hip

I dug the ell-square pitkin;

Poured we libations unto each the dead, First mead and then sweet wine, water mixed with white flour Then prayed I many a prayer to the sickly death’s-heads; As set in Ithaca, sterile bulls of the best For sacrifice, heaping the pyre with goods, A sheep to Tiresias only, black and a bell-sheep.

Dark blood flowed in the fosse,

Souls out of Erebus, cadaverous dead, of brides Of youths and of the old who had borne much; Souls stained with recent tears, girls tender, Men many, mauled with bronze lance heads, Battle spoil, bearing yet dreory arms,

These many crowded about me; with shouting, Pallor upon me, cried to my men for more beasts; Slaughtered the herds, sheep slain of bronze; Poured ointment, cried to the gods,

To Pluto the strong, and praised Proserpine; Unsheathed the narrow sword,

I sat to keep off the impetuous impotent dead, Till I should hear Tiresias.

But first Elpenor came, our friend Elpenor, Unburied, cast on the wide earth,

Limbs that we left in the house of Circe, Unwept, unwrapped in the sepulchre, since toils urged other.

Pitiful spirit. And I cried in hurried speech: “Elpenor, how art thou come to this dark coast?

“Cam’st thou afoot, outstripping seamen?”

And he in heavy speech:

“Ill fate and abundant wine. I slept in Crice’s ingle.

“Going down the long ladder unguarded,

“I fell against the buttress,




“Shattered the nape-nerve, the soul sought Avernus.

“But thou, O King, I bid remember me, unwept, unburied, “Heap up mine arms, be tomb by sea-bord, and inscribed: “A man of no fortune, and with a name to come.

“And set my oar up, that I swung mid fellows.”

And Anticlea came, whom I beat off, and then Tiresias Theban, Holding his golden wand, knew me, and spoke first: “A second time? why? man of ill star,

“Facing the sunless dead and this joyless region?

“Stand from the fosse, leave me my bloody bever “For soothsay.”

And I stepped back,

And he strong with the blood, said then: “Odysseus “Shalt return through spiteful Neptune, over dark seas, “Lose all companions.” Then Anticlea came.

Lie quiet Divus. I mean, that is Andreas Divus, In officina Wecheli, 1538, out of Homer.

And he sailed, by Sirens and thence outwards and away And unto Crice.

Venerandam,

In the Cretan’s phrase, with the golden crown, Aphrodite, Cypri munimenta sortita est, mirthful, oricalchi, with golden Girdle and breat bands, thou with dark eyelids Bearing the golden bough of Argicidia. So that:





Canto 13

Kung walked

by the dynastic temple

and into the cedar grove,

and then out by the lower river, And with him Khieu Tchi

and Tian the low speaking

And “we are unknown,” said Kung,

“You will take up charioteering?

“Then you will become known,

“Or perhaps I should take up charioterring, or archery?

“Or the practice of public speaking?”

And Tseu-lou said, “I would put the defences in order,”

And Khieu said, “If I were lord of a province “I would put it in better order than this is.”

And Tchi said, “I would prefer a small mountain temple, “With order in the observances,

with a suitable performance of the ritual,”

And Tian said, with his hand on the strings of his lute The low sounds continuing

after his hand left the strings, And the sound went up like smoke, under the leaves, And he looked after the sound:

“The old swimming hole,

“And the boys flopping off the planks,

“Or sitting in the underbrush playing mandolins.”

And Kung smiled upon all of them equally.

And Thseng-sie desired to know:

“Which had answered correctly?”

And Kung said, “They have all answered correctly, “That is to say, each in his nature.”

And Kung raised his cane against Yuan Jang, Yuan Jang being his elder,

For Yuan Jang sat by the roadside pretending to be receiving wisdom.

And Kung said

“You old fool, come out of it,

“Get up and do something useful.”

And Kung said

“Respect a child’s faculties

“From the moment it inhales the clear air, “But a man of fifty who knows nothng

Is worthy of no respect.”

And “When the prince has gathered about him “All the savants and artists, his riches will be fully employed.”

And Kung said, and wrote on the bo leaves: If a man have not order within him He can not spread order about him;

And if a man have not order within him

His family will not act with due order; And if the prince have not order within him He can not put order in his dominions.

And Kung gave the words “order”




and “brotherly deference”

And said nothing of the “life after death.”

And he said

“Anyone can run to excesses,

“It is easy to shoot past the mark,

“It is hard to stand firm in the middle.”

And they said: If a man commit murder

Should his father protect him, and hide him?

And Kung said:

He should hide him.

And Kung gave his daughter to Kong-Tchang Although Kong-Tchang was in prison.

And he gave his niece to Nan-Young

although Nan-Young was out of office.

And Kung said “Wan ruled with moderation, “In his day the State was well kept, “And even I can remember

“A day when the historians left blanks in their writings, “I mean, for things they didn’t know,

“But that time seems to be passing.

A day when the historians left blanks in their writings, But that time seems to be passing.”

And Kung said, “Without character you will “be unable to play on that instrument “Or to execute the music fit for the Odes.

“The blossoms of the apricot

“blow from the east to the west, “And I have tried to keep them from falling.”





Canto 49

For the seven lakes, and by no man these verses: Rain; empty river; a voyage,

Fire from frozen cloud, heavy rain in the twilight Under the cabin roof was one lantern.

The reeds are heavy; bent;

and the bamboos speak as if weeping.

Autumn moon; hills rise about lakes

against sunset

Evening is like a curtain of cloud,

a blurr above ripples; and through it

sharp long spikes of the cinnamon,

a cold tune amid reeds.

Behind hill the monk’s bell

borne on the wind.

Sail passed here in April; may return in October Boat fades in silver; slowly;

Sun blaze alone on the river.

Where wine flag catches the sunset

Sparse chimneys smoke in the cross light Comes then snow scur on the river

And a world is covered with jade

Small boat floats like a lanthorn,

The flowing water closts as with cold. And at San Yin they are a people of leisure.

Wild geese swoop to the sand-bar,

Clouds gather about the hole of the window Broad water; geese line out with the autumn Rooks clatter over the fishermen’s lanthorns, A light moves on the north sky line;

where the young boys prod stones for shrimp.

In seventeen hundred came Tsing to these hill lakes.

A light moves on the South sky line.

State by creating riches shd. thereby get into debt?

Thsi is infamy; this is Geryon.

This canal goes still to TenShi

Though the old king built it for pleasure K E I M E N R A N K E I





K I U M A N M A N K E I


JITSU GETSU K O K W A

T A N FUKU T A N K A I

Sun up; work

sundown; to rest

dig well and drink of the water

dig field; eat of the grain




Imperial power is? and to us what is it?

The fourth; the dimension of stillness.

And the power over wild beasts.





Canto I

And then went down to the ship,

Set keel to breakers, forth on the godly sea, and We set up mast and sail on tha swart ship, Bore sheep aboard her, and our bodies also Heavy with weeping, so winds from sternward Bore us out onward with bellying canvas, Circe’s this craft, the trim-coifed goddess.

Then sat we amidships, wind jamming the tiller, Thus with stretched sail, we went over sea till day’s end.

Sun to his slumber, shadows o’er all the ocean, Came we then to the bounds of deepest water, To the Kimmerian lands, and peopled cities Covered with close-webbed mist, unpierced ever With glitter of sun-rays

Nor with stars stretched, nor looking back from heaven Swartest night stretched over wretched men there.

The ocean flowing backward, came we then to the place Aforesaid by Circe.

Here did they rites, Perimedes and Eurylochus, And drawing sword from my hip

I dug the ell-square pitkin;

Poured we libations unto each the dead, First mead and then sweet wine, water mixed with white flour.

Then prayed I many a prayer to the sickly death’s-head; As set in Ithaca, sterile bulls of the best For sacrifice, heaping the pyre with goods, A sheep to Tiresias only, black and a bell-sheep.

Dark blood flowed in the fosse,

Souls out of Erebus, cadaverous dead, of brides Of youths and at the old who had borne much; Souls stained with recent tears, girls tender, Men many, mauled with bronze lance heads, Battle spoil, bearing yet dreory arms,

These many crowded about me; with shouting, Pallor upon me, cried to my men for more beasts; Slaughtered the heards, sheep slain of bronze; Poured ointment, cried to the gods,

To Pluto the strong, and praised Proserpine; Unsheathed the narrow sword,

I sat to keep off the impetuous impotent dead, Till I should hear Tiresias.

But first Elpenor came, our friend Elpenor, Unburied, cast on the wide earth,

Limbs that we left in the house of Circe, Unwept, unwrapped in sepulchre, since toils urged other.

Pitiful spirit.And I cried in hurried speech: “Elpenor, how art thou come to this dark coast?

Cam’st thou afoot, outstripping seamen?”

And he in heavy speech:

“Ill fate and abundant wine. I slept in Circe’s ingle.

Going down the long ladder unguarded,




I fell against the buttress,

Shattered the nape-nerve, the soul sought Avernus.

But thou, O King, I bid remember me, unwept, unburied, Heap up mine arms, be tomb by sea-bord, and inscribed: A man of no fortune, and with a name to come.

And set my oar up, that I swung mid fellows.”

And Anticlea came, whom I beat off, and then Tiresias Theban, Holding his golden wand, knew me, and spoke first: “A second time? why? man of ill star, Facing the sunless dead and this joyless region?

Stand from the fosse, leave me my bloody bever For soothsay.”

And I stepped back,

And he stong with the blood, said then: “Odysseus Shalt return through spiteful Neptune, over dark seas, Lose all companions.” And then Anticlea came.

Lie quiet Divus. I mean, that is Andreas Divus, In officina Wecheli, 1538, out of Homer.

And he sailed, by Sirens and thence outward and away And unto Circe.

Venerandam,

In the Creatan’s phrase, with the golden crown, Aphrodite, Cypri munimenta sortita est, mirthful, orichalchi, with golden Girdles and breast bands, thou with dark eyelids Bearing the golden bough of Argicida. So that:





Canto I: And Then Went Down to the Ship And then went down to the ship,

Set keel to breakers, forth on the godly sea, and We set up mast and sail on that swart ship, Bore sheep aboard her, and our bodies also Heavy with weeping, and winds from sternward Bore us onward with bellying canvas,

Crice’s this craft, the trim-coifed goddess.

Then sat we amidships, wind jamming the tiller, Thus with stretched sail, we went over sea till day’s end.

Sun to his slumber, shadows o’er all the ocean, Came we then to the bounds of deepest water, To the Kimmerian lands, and peopled cities Covered with close-webbed mist, unpierced ever With glitter of sun-rays

Nor with stars stretched, nor looking back from heaven Swartest night stretched over wreteched men there.

The ocean flowing backward, came we then to the place Aforesaid by Circe.

Here did they rites, Perimedes and Eurylochus, And drawing sword from my hip

I dug the ell-square pitkin;

Poured we libations unto each the dead, First mead and then sweet wine, water mixed with white flour Then prayed I many a prayer to the sickly death’s-heads; As set in Ithaca, sterile bulls of the best For sacrifice, heaping the pyre with goods, A sheep to Tiresias only, black and a bell-sheep.

Dark blood flowed in the fosse,

Souls out of Erebus, cadaverous dead, of brides Of youths and of the old who had borne much; Souls stained with recent tears, girls tender, Men many, mauled with bronze lance heads, Battle spoil, bearing yet dreory arms,

These many crowded about me; with shouting, Pallor upon me, cried to my men for more beasts; Slaughtered the herds, sheep slain of bronze; Poured ointment, cried to the gods,

To Pluto the strong, and praised Proserpine; Unsheathed the narrow sword,

I sat to keep off the impetuous impotent dead, Till I should hear Tiresias.

But first Elpenor came, our friend Elpenor, Unburied, cast on the wide earth,

Limbs that we left in the house of Circe, Unwept, unwrapped in the sepulchre, since toils urged other.

Pitiful spirit. And I cried in hurried speech: “Elpenor, how art thou come to this dark coast?

“Cam’st thou afoot, outstripping seamen?”

And he in heavy speech:

“Ill fate and abundant wine. I slept in Crice’s ingle.

“Going down the long ladder unguarded,

“I fell against the buttress,




“Shattered the nape-nerve, the soul sought Avernus.

“But thou, O King, I bid remember me, unwept, unburied, “Heap up mine arms, be tomb by sea-bord, and inscribed: “A man of no fortune, and with a name to come.

“And set my oar up, that I swung mid fellows.”

And Anticlea came, whom I beat off, and then Tiresias Theban, Holding his golden wand, knew me, and spoke first: “A second time? why? man of ill star,

“Facing the sunless dead and this joyless region?

“Stand from the fosse, leave me my bloody bever “For soothsay.”

And I stepped back,

And he strong with the blood, said then: “Odysseus “Shalt return through spiteful Neptune, over dark seas, “Lose all companions.” Then Anticlea came.

Lie quiet Divus. I mean, that is Andreas Divus, In officina Wecheli, 1538, out of Homer.

And he sailed, by Sirens and thence outwards and away And unto Crice.

Venerandam,

In the Cretan’s phrase, with the golden crown, Aphrodite, Cypri munimenta sortita est, mirthful, oricalchi, with golden Girdle and breat bands, thou with dark eyelids Bearing the golden bough of Argicidia. So that:





Canto XIII: Kung Walked

Kung walked

by the dynastic temple

and into the cedar grove,

and then out by the lower river,

And with him Khieu Tchi

and Tian the low speaking

And “we are unknown,” said Kung,

“You will take up charioteering?

“Then you will become known,

“Or perhaps I should take up charioterring, or archery?

“Or the practice of public speaking?”

And Tseu-lou said, “I would put the defences in order,”

And Khieu said, “If I were lord of a province “I would put it in better order than this is.”

And Tchi said, “I would prefer a small mountain temple, “With order in the observances,

with a suitable performance of the ritual,”

And Tian said, with his hand on the strings of his lute The low sounds continuing

after his hand left the strings,

And the sound went up like smoke, under the leaves, And he looked after the sound:

“The old swimming hole,

“And the boys flopping off the planks, “Or sitting in the underbrush playing mandolins.”

And Kung smiled upon all of them equally.

And Thseng-sie desired to know:

“Which had answered correctly?”

And Kung said, “They have all answered correctly, “That is to say, each in his nature.”

And Kung raised his cane against Yuan Jang, Yuan Jang being his elder,

For Yuan Jang sat by the roadside pretending to be receiving wisdom.

And Kung said

“You old fool, come out of it,

“Get up and do something useful.”

And Kung said

“Respect a child’s faculties

“From the moment it inhales the clear air, “But a man of fifty who knows nothng

Is worthy of no respect.”

And “When the prince has gathered about him “All the savants and artists, his riches will be fully employed.”

And Kung said, and wrote on the bo leaves: If a man have not order within him

He can not spread order about him;

And if a man have not order within him

His family will not act with due order; And if the prince have not order within him He can not put order in his dominions.

And Kung gave the words “order”




and “brotherly deference”

And said nothing of the “life after death.”

And he said

“Anyone can run to excesses,

“It is easy to shoot past the mark,

“It is hard to stand firm in the middle.”

And they said: If a man commit murder

Should his father protect him, and hide him?

And Kung said:

He should hide him.

And Kung gave his daughter to Kong-Tchang Although Kong-Tchang was in prison.

And he gave his niece to Nan-Young

although Nan-Young was out of office.

And Kung said “Wan ruled with moderation, “In his day the State was well kept,

“And even I can remember

“A day when the historians left blanks in their writings, “I mean, for things they didn’t know,

“But that time seems to be passing.

A day when the historians left blanks in their writings, But that time seems to be passing.”

And Kung said, “Without character you will “be unable to play on that instrument

“Or to execute the music fit for the Odes.

“The blossoms of the apricot

“blow from the east to the west,

“And I have tried to keep them from falling.”





Canto XLIX: For the Seven Lakes

For the seven lakes, and by no man these verses: Rain; empty river; a voyage,

Fire from frozen cloud, heavy rain in the twilight Under the cabin roof was one lantern.

The reeds are heavy; bent;

and the bamboos speak as if weeping.

Autumn moon; hills rise about lakes

against sunset

Evening is like a curtain of cloud,

a blurr above ripples; and through it

sharp long spikes of the cinnamon,

a cold tune amid reeds.

Behind hill the monk’s bell

borne on the wind.

Sail passed here in April; may return in October Boat fades in silver; slowly;

Sun blaze alone on the river.

Where wine flag catches the sunset

Sparse chimneys smoke in the cross light Comes then snow scur on the river

And a world is covered with jade

Small boat floats like a lanthorn,

The flowing water closts as with cold. And at San Yin they are a people of leisure.

Wild geese swoop to the sand-bar,

Clouds gather about the hole of the window Broad water; geese line out with the autumn Rooks clatter over the fishermen’s lanthorns, A light moves on the north sky line;

where the young boys prod stones for shrimp.

In seventeen hundred came Tsing to these hill lakes.

A light moves on the South sky line.

State by creating riches shd. thereby get into debt?

This is infamy; this is Geryon.

This canal goes still to TenShi

Though the old king built it for pleasure K E I M E N R A N K E I





K I U M A N M A N K E I


JITSU GETSU K O K W A

T A N FUKU T A N K A I

Sun up; work

sundown; to rest

dig well and drink of the water

dig field; eat of the grain




Imperial power is? and to us what is it?

The fourth; the dimension of stillness.

And the power over wild beasts.





Cino

Italian Campagna 1309, the open road

Bah! I have sung women in three cities, But it is all the same;

And I will sing of the sun.

Lips, words, and you snare them,

Dreams, words, and they are as jewels,

Strange spells of old deity,

Ravens, nights, allurement:

And they are not;

Having become the souls of song.

Eyes, dreams, lips, and the night goes.

Being upon the road once more,

They are not.

Forgetful in their towers of our tuneing Once for wind-runeing

They dream us-toward and

Sighing, say, “Would Cino,

Passionate Cino, of the wrinkling eyes, Gay Cino, of quick laughter,

Cino, of the dare, the jibe.

Frail Cino, strongest of his tribe

That tramp old ways beneath the sun-light, Would Cino of the Luth were here!”

Once, twice a year–

Vaguely thus word they:

“Cino?” “Oh, eh, Cino Polnesi

The singer is’t you mean?”

“Ah yes, passed once our way,

A saucy fellow, but …

(Oh they are all one these vagabonds),

Peste! ‘tis his own songs?

Or some other’s that he sings?

But you, My Lord, how with your city?”

My you “My Lord,” God’s pity!

And all I knew were out, My Lord, you

Were Lack-land Cino, e’en as I am,

O Sinistro.

I have sung women in three cities.

But it is all one.

I will sing of the sun.

… eh? … they mostly had grey eyes, But it is all one, I will sing of the sun.

“‘Pollo Phoibee, old tin pan, you

Glory to Zeus’ aegis-day,




Shield o’ steel-blue, th’ heaven o’er us Hath for boss thy lustre gay!

‘Pollo Phoibee, to our way-fare

Make thy laugh our wander-lied;

Bid thy ‘flugence bear away care.

Cloud and rain-tears pass they fleet!

Seeking e’er the new-laid rast-way

To the gardens of the sun …

*

I have sung women in three cities

But it is all one.

I will sing of the white birds

In the blue waters of heaven,

The clouds that are spray to its sea.”





E.P. Ode Pour L’election De Son Sepulchre For three years, out of key with his time, He strove to resuscitate the dead art

Of poetry; to maintain “the sublime”

In the old sense. Wrong from the start—

No, hardly, but seeing he had been born In a half savage country, out of date;

Bent resolutely on wringing lilies from the acorn; Capaneus; trout for factitious bait;

Idmen gar toi panth, hos eni troie

Caught in the unstopped ear;

Giving the rocks small lee-way

The chopped seas held him, therefore, that year.

His true Penelope was Flaubert,

He fished by obstinate isles;

Observed the elegance of Circe’s hair

Rather than the mottoes on sun-dials.

Unaffected by “the march of events,”

He passed from men’s memory in l’an trentuniesme de son eage;the case presents

No adjunct to the Muses’ diadem.

II

The age demanded an image

Of its accelerated grimace,

Something for the modern stage

Not, at any rate, an Attic grace;

Not, certainly, the obscure reveries

Of the inward gaze;

Better mendacities

Than the classics in paraphrase!

The “age demanded” chiefly a mould in plaster, Made with no loss of time,

A prose kinema, not, not assuredly, alabaster Or the “sculpture” of rhyme.

III

The tea-rose tea-gown, etc.

Supplants the mousseline of Cos,

The pianola “replaces”

Sappho’s barbitos.

Christ follows Dionysus,

Phallic and ambrosial

Made way for macerations;

Caliban casts out Ariel.





All things are a flowing

Sage Heracleitus say;

But a tawdry cheapness

Shall outlast our days.

Even the Christian beauty

Defects—after Samothrace;

We see to kalon

Decreed in the market place.

Faun’s flesh is not to us,

Nor the saint’s vision.

We have the press for wafer;

Franchise for circumcision.

All men, in law, are equals.

Free of Pisistratus,

We choose a knave or an eunuch

To rule over us.

O bright Apollo,

Tin andra, tin heroa, tina theon,

What god, man or hero

Shall I place a tin wreath upon!

IV

These fought in any case,

And some believing,

pro domo, in any case…

Some quick to arm,

some for adventure,

some from fear of weakness,

some from fear of censure,

some for love of slaughter, in imagination, learning later…

some in fear, learning love of slaughter; Died some, pro patria,

non “dulce” not “et decor”…

walked eye-deep in hell

believing old men’s lies, then unbelieving came home, home to a lie,

home to many deceits,

home to old lies and new infamy;

usury age-old and age-thick

and liars in public places.

Daring as never before, wastage as never before.

Young blood and high blood,

fair cheeks, and fine bodies;





fortitude as never before

frankness as never before,

disillusions as never told in the old days, hysterias, trench confessions,

laughter out of dead bellies.

V

There died a myriad,

And of the best, among them,

For an old bitch gone in the teeth,

For a botched civilization,

Charm, smiling at the good mouth,

Quick eyes gone under earth’s lid,

For two gross of broken statues,

For a few thousand battered books.





Envoi

Go, dumb-born book,

Tell her that sang me once that song of Lawes: Hadst thou but song

As thou hast subjects known,

Then were there cause in thee that should condone Even my faults that heavy upon me lie

And build her glories their longevity.

Tell her that sheds

Such treasure in the air,

Recking naught else but that her graces give Life to the moment,

I would bid them live

As roses might, in magic amber laid,

Red overwrought with orange and all made One substance and one colour

Braving time.

Tell her that goes

With song upon her lips

But sings not out the song, nor knows

The maker of it, some other mouth,

May be as fair as hers,

Might, in new ages, gain her worshippers, When our two dusts with Waller’s shall be laid, Siftings on siftings in oblivion,

Till change hath broken down

All things save Beauty alone.





Epilogue


O chansons foregoing


You were a seven days’ wonder.

When you came out in the magazines

You created considerable stir in Chicago, And now you are stale and worn out,

You’re a very depleted fashion,

A hoop-skirt, a calash,

An homely, transient antiquity.

Only emotion remains.

Your emotions?

Are those of a maitre-de-cafe.





Ezra on the Strike

Wal, Thanksgivin’ do be comin’ round.

With the price of turkeys on the bound, And coal, by gum! Thet were just found, Is surely gettin’ cheaper.

The winds will soon begin to howl,

And winter, in its yearly growl,

Across the medders begin to prowl,

And Jack Frost gettin’ deeper.

By shucks! It seems to me,

That you I orter be

Thankful, that our Ted could see

A way to operate it.

I sez to Mandy, sure, sez I,

I’ll bet thet air patch o’ rye

Thet he’ll squash ‘em by-and-by,

And he did, by cricket!

No use talkin’, he’s the man -

One of the best thet ever ran,

Fer didn’t I turn Republican

One o’ the fust?

I ‘lowed as how he’d beat the rest,

But old Si Perkins, he hemmed and guessed, And sed as how it wuzn’t best

To meddle with the trust.





Fan-Piece, For Her Imperial Lord

O fan of white silk,

clear as frost on the grass-blade,

You also are laid aside.





Francesca

You came in out of the night

And there were flowers in your hand,

Now you will come out of a confusion of people, Out of a turmoil of speech about you.

I who have seen you amid the primal things Was angry when they spoke your name

IN ordinary places.

I would that the cool waves might flow over my mind, And that the world should dry as a dead leaf, Or as a dandelion see-pod and be swept away, So that I might find you again,

Alone.





from “Hugh Selwyn Mauberly”

For three years, out of key with his time, He strove to resuscitate the dead art

Of poetry; to maintain “the sublime”

In the old scene.Wrong from the start—

No, hardly, but seeing he had been born In a half-savage country, out of date;

Bent resolutely on wringing lilies from the acorn; Capaneus; trout for factitious bait;

[idmen gar toi pant, hos eni Troiei]

Caught in the unstopped ear;

Giving the rocks small lee-way

The chopped seas held him, therefore, that year.

His true Penelope was Flaubert,

He fished by obstinate isles;

Observed the elegance of Circe’s hair

Rather than the mottoes on sun-dials.

Unaffected by “the march of events,”

He passed from men’s memory in l’an trentuniesme De son eage; the case presents

No adjunct to the Muses’ diadem.





Further Instructions

Come, my songs, let us express our baser passions.

Let us express our envy for the man with a steady job and no worry about the future.

You are very idle, my songs,

I fear you will come to a bad end.

You stand about the streets, You loiter at the corners and bus-stops, You do next to nothing at all.

You do not even express our inner nobilitys, You will come to a very bad end.

And I? I have gone half-cracked.

I have talked to you so much that I almost see you about me, Insolent little beasts! Shameless! Devoid of clothing!

But you, newest song of the lot,

You are not old enough to have done much mischief.

I will get you a green coat out of China With dragons worked upon it.

I will get you the scarlet silk trousers From the statue of the infant Christ at Santa Maria Novella; Lest they say we are lacking in taste,

Or that there is no caste in this family.





Grace Before Song

Lord God of heaven that with mercy dight Th’alternate prayer wheel of the night and light Eternal hath to thee, and in whose sight Our days as rain drops in the sea surge fall, As bright white drops upon a leaden sea Grant so my songs to this grey folk may be: As drops that dream and gleam and falling catch the sun Evan’scent mirrors every opal one

Of such his splendor as their compass is, So, bold My Songs, seek ye such death as this.





Historion

No man hath dared to write this thing as yet, And yet I know, how that the souls of all men great At times pass athrough us,

And we are melted into them, and are not Save reflexions of their souls.

Thus am I Dante for a space and am

One Francois Villon, ballad-lord and thief, Or am such holy ones I may not write

Lest blasphemy be writ against my name; This for an instant and the flame is gone.

‘Tis as in midmost us there glows a sphere Translucent, molten gold, that is the “I”

And into this some form projects itself: Christus, or John, or eke the Florentine; And as the clear space is not if a form’s Imposed thereon,

So cease we from all being for the time, And these, the Masters of the Soul, live on.





Histrion

No man hath dared to write this thing as yet, And yet I know, how that the souls of all men great At times pass athrough us,

And we are melted into them, and are not Save reflexions of their souls.

Thus am I Dante for a space and am

One Francois Villon, ballad-lord and thief, Or am such holy ones I may not write

Lest blasphemy be writ against my name; This for an instant and the flame is gone.

‘Tis as in midmost us there glows a sphere Translucent, molten gold, that is the “I”

And into this some form projects itself: Christus, or John, or eke the Florentine; And as the clear space is not if a form’s Imposed thereon,

So cease we from all being for the time, And these, the Masters of the Soul, live on.





Hugh Selwyn Mauberly (Part I)

“Vocat aestus in umbram”

Nemesianus Es. IV.

E. P. Ode pour l’élection de son sépulchre For three years, out of key with his time, He strove to resuscitate the dead art

Of poetry; to maintain “the sublime”

In the old sense. Wrong from the start —

No, hardly, but, seeing he had been born In a half savage country, out of date;

Bent resolutely on wringing lilies from the acorn; Capaneus; trout for factitious bait:

“Idmen gar toi panth, os eni Troie

Caught in the unstopped ear;

Giving the rocks small lee-way

The chopped seas held him, therefore, that year.

His true Penelope was Flaubert,

He fished by obstinate isles;

Observed the elegance of Circe’s hair

Rather than the mottoes on sun-dials.

Unaffected by “the march of events”,

He passed from men’s memory in l’an trentiesme De son eage; the case presents

No adjunct to the Muses’ diadem.

II.

The age demanded an image

Of its accelerated grimace,

Something for the modern stage,

Not, at any rate, an Attic grace;

Not, not certainly, the obscure reveries Of the inward gaze;

Better mendacities

Than the classics in paraphrase!

The “age demanded” chiefly a mould in plaster, Made with no loss of time,

A prose kinema, not, not assuredly, alabaster Or the “sculpture” of rhyme.

III.

The tea-rose, tea-gown, etc.

Supplants the mousseline of Cos,

The pianola “replaces”




Sappho’s barbitos.

Christ follows Dionysus,

Phallic and ambrosial

Made way for macerations;

Caliban casts out Ariel.

All things are a flowing,

Sage Heracleitus says;

But a tawdry cheapness

Shall reign throughout our days.

Even the Christian beauty

Defects — after Samothrace;

We see to kalon

Decreed in the market place.

Faun’s flesh is not to us,

Nor the saint’s vision.

We have the press for wafer;

Franchise for circumcision.

All men, in law, are equals.

Free of Peisistratus,

We choose a knave or an eunuch

To rule over us.

A bright Apollo,

tin andra, tin eroa, tina theon,

What god, man, or hero

Shall I place a tin wreath upon?

IV.

These fought, in any case,

and some believing, pro domo, in any case ..

Some quick to arm,

some for adventure,

some from fear of weakness,

some from fear of censure,

some for love of slaughter, in imagination, learning later …

some in fear, learning love of slaughter; Died some pro patria, non dulce non et decor” ..

walked eye-deep in hell

believing in old men’s lies, then unbelieving came home, home to a lie,

home to many deceits,




home to old lies and new infamy;

usury age-old and age-thick

and liars in public places.

Daring as never before, wastage as never before.

Young blood and high blood,

Fair cheeks, and fine bodies;

fortitude as never before

frankness as never before,

disillusions as never told in the old days, hysterias, trench confessions,

laughter out of dead bellies.



V.

There died a myriad,

And of the best, among them,

For an old bitch gone in the teeth,

For a botched civilization.

Charm, smiling at the good mouth,

Quick eyes gone under earth’s lid,

For two gross of broken statues,

For a few thousand battered books.

Yeux Glauques

Gladstone was still respected,

When John Ruskin produced

“Kings Treasuries”; Swinburne

And Rossetti still abused.

Foetid Buchanan lifted up his voice

When that faun’s head of hers

Became a pastime for

Painters and adulterers.

The Burne-Jones cartons

Have preserved her eyes;

Still, at the Tate, they teach

Cophetua to rhapsodize;

Thin like brook-water,

With a vacant gaze.

The English Rubaiyat was still-born

In those days.





The thin, clear gaze, the same

Still darts out faun-like from the half-ruin’d face, Questing and passive ….

“Ah, poor Jenny’s case” …

Bewildered that a world

Shows no surprise

At her last maquero’s

Adulteries.

“Siena Mi Fe’, Disfecemi Maremma”

Among the pickled foetuses and bottled bones, Engaged in perfecting the catalogue,

I found the last scion of the

Senatorial families of Strasbourg, Monsieur Verog.

For two hours he talked of Gallifet;

Of Dowson; of the Rhymers’ Club;

Told me how Johnson (Lionel) died

By falling from a high stool in a pub …

But showed no trace of alcohol

At the autopsy, privately performed —

Tissue preserved — the pure mind

Arose toward Newman as the whiskey warmed.

Dowson found harlots cheaper than hotels; Headlam for uplift; Image impartially imbued With raptures for Bacchus, Terpsichore and the Church.

So spoke the author of “The Dorian Mood”, M. Verog, out of step with the decade,

Detached from his contemporaries,

Neglected by the young,

Because of these reveries.

Brennbaum.

The sky-like limpid eyes,

The circular infant’s face,

The stiffness from spats to collar

Never relaxing into grace;

The heavy memories of Horeb, Sinai and the forty years, Showed only when the daylight fell

Level across the face

Of Brennbaum “The Impeccable”.

Mr. Nixon

In the cream gilded cabin of his steam yacht



Mr. Nixon advised me kindly, to advance with fewer Dangers of delay. “Consider

Carefully the reviewer.

“I was as poor as you are;

“When I began I got, of course,

“Advance on royalties, fifty at first”, said Mr. Nixon, “Follow me, and take a column,

“Even if you have to work free.

“Butter reviewers. From fifty to three hundred “I rose in eighteen months;

“The hardest nut I had to crack

“Was Dr. Dundas.

“I never mentioned a man but with the view “Of selling my own works.

“The tip’s a good one, as for literature “It gives no man a sinecure.”

And no one knows, at sight a masterpiece.

And give up verse, my boy,

There’s nothing in it.”

*

Likewise a friend of Bloughram’s once advised me: Don’t kick against the pricks,

Accept opinion. The “Nineties” tried your game And died, there’s nothing in it.

X.

Beneath the sagging roof

The stylist has taken shelter,

Unpaid, uncelebrated,

At last from the world’s welter

Nature receives him,

With a placid and uneducated mistress

He exercises his talents

And the soil meets his distress.

The haven from sophistications and contentions Leaks through its thatch;

He offers succulent cooking;

The door has a creaking latch.

XI.

“Conservatrix of Milésien”

Habits of mind and feeling,




Possibly. But in Ealing

With the most bank-clerkly of Englishmen?

No, “Milésian” is an exaggeration.

No instinct has survived in her

Older than those her grandmother

Told her would fit her station.

XII.

“Daphne with her thighs in bark

Stretches toward me her leafy hands”, —

Subjectively. In the stuffed-satin drawing-room I await The Lady Valentine’s commands,

Knowing my coat has never been

Of precisely the fashion

To stimulate, in her,

A durable passion;

Doubtful, somewhat, of the value

Of well-gowned approbation

Of literary effort,

But never of The Lady Valentine’s vocation: Poetry, her border of ideas,

The edge, uncertain, but a means of blending With other strata

Where the lower and higher have ending; A hook to catch the Lady Jane’s attention, A modulation toward the theatre,

Also, in the case of revolution,

A possible friend and comforter.

*

Conduct, on the other hand, the soul

“Which the highest cultures have nourished”

To Fleet St. where

Dr. Johnson flourished;

Beside this thoroughfare

The sale of half-hose has

Long since superseded the cultivation

Of Pierian roses.





In a Station of the Metro

The apparition of these faces in the crowd; petals on a wet, black bough.





In Tempore Senectutis

When I am old

I will not have you look apart

From me, into the cold,

Friend of my heart,

Nor be sad in your remembrance

Of the careless, mad-heart semblance

That the wind hath blown away

When I am old.

When I am old

And the white hot wonder-fire

Unto the world seem cold,

My soul’s desire

Know you then that all life’s shower,

The rain of the years, that hour

Shall make blow for us one flower,

Including all, when we are old.

When I am old

If you remember

Any love save what is then

Hearth light unto life’s December

Be your joy of past sweet chalices

To know then naught but this

“How many wonders are less sweet

Than love I bear to thee

When I am old.”





In the Old Age of the Soul

I do not choose to dream; there cometh on me Some strange old lust for deeds.

As to the nerveless hand of some old warrior The sword-hilt or the war-worn wonted helmet Brings momentary life and long-fled cunning, So to my soul grown old -

Grown old with many a jousting, many a foray, Grown old with namy a hither-coming and hence-going -

Till now they send him dreams and no more deed; So doth he flame again with might for action, Forgetful of the council of elders,

Forgetful that who rules doth no more battle, Forgetful that such might no more cleaves to him So doth he flame again toward valiant doing.





Invern

Earth’s winter cometh

And I being part of all

And sith the spirit of all moveth in me I must needs bear earth’s winter

Drawn cold and grey with hours

And joying in a momentary sun,

Lo I am withered with waiting till my spring cometh!

Or crouch covetous of warmth

O’er scant-logged ingle blaze,

Must take cramped joy in tomed Longinus That, read I him first time

The woods agleam with summer

Or mid desirous winds of spring,

Had set me singing spheres

Or made heart to wander forth among warm roses Or curl in grass next neath a kindly moon.





Ione, Dead the Long Year

Empty are the ways,

Empty are the ways of this land

And the flowers

Bend over with heavy heads.

They bend in vain.

Empty are the ways of this land

Where Ione

Walked once, and now does not walk

But seems like a person just gone.





Ité

Go, my songs, seek your praise from the young and from the intolerant,

Move among the lovers of perfection alone.

Seek ever to stand in the hard Sophoclean light And take you wounds from it gladly.





La Regina Avrillouse

Lady of rich allure,

Queen of the spring’s embrace,

Your arms are long like boughs of ash,

Mid laugh-broken streams, spirit of rain unsure, Breath of the poppy flower,

All the wood thy bower

And the hills thy dwelling-place.

This will I no more dream;

Warm is thy arm’s allure,

Warm is the gust of breath

That ere thy lips meet mine

Kisseth my cheek and saith:

“This is the joy of earth,

Here is the wine of mirth

Drain ye one goblet sure,

Take ye the honey cup

The honied song raise up,

Drink of the spring’s allure,

April and dew and rain;

Brown of the earth sing sure,

Cheeks and lips and hair

And soft breath that kisseth where

Thy lips have come not yet to drink.”

Moss and the mold of earth,

These be thy couch of mirth,

Long arms thy boughs of shade

April-alluring, as the blade

Of grass doth catch the dew

And make it crown to hold the sun.

Banner be you

Above my head,

Glory to all wold display’d,

April-alluring, glory-bold.





Lament of the Frontier Guard

By the North Gate, the wind blows full of sand, Lonely from the beginning of time until now!

Trees fall, the grass goes yellow with autumn.

I climb the towers and towers

to watch out the barbarous land:

Desolate castle, the sky, the wide desert.

There is no wall left to this village.

Bones white with a thousand frosts,

High heaps, covered with trees and grass; Who brought this to pass?

Who has brought the flaming imperial anger?

Who has brought the army with drums and with kettle-drums?

Barbarous kings.

A gracious spring, turned to blood-ravenous autumn, A turmoil of wars - men, spread over the middle kingdom, Three hundred and sixty thousand,

And sorrow, sorrow like rain.

Sorrow to go, and sorrow, sorrow returning, Desolate, desolate fields,

And no children of warfare upon them,

No longer the men for offence and defence.

Ah, how shall you know the dreary sorrow at the North Gate, With Rihoku’s name forgotten,

And we guardsmen fed to the tigers.

By Rihaku. [Li Po?]





L’Art

Green arsenic smeared on an egg-white cloth, Crushed strawberries! Come, let us feast our eyes.





Masks

These tales of old disguisings, are they not Strange myths of souls that found themselves among Unwonted folk that spake an hostile tongue, Some soul from all the rest who’d not forgot The star-span acres of a former lot

Where boundless mid the clouds his course he swung, Or carnate with his elder brothers sung Ere ballad-makers lisped of Camelot?

Old singers half-forgetful of their tunes, Old painters color-blind come back once more, Old poets skill-less in the wind-heart runes, Old wizards lacking in their wonder-lore: All they that with strange sadness in their eyes Ponder in silence o’er earth’s queynt devyse?





Medallion

Luini in porcelain!

The grand piano

Utters a profane

Protest with her clear soprano.

The sleek head emerges

From the gold-yellow frock

As Anadyomene in the opening

Pages of Reinach.

Honey-red, closing the face-oval,

A basket-work of braids which seem as if they were Spun in King Minos’ hall

From metal, or intractable amber;

The face-oval beneath the glaze,

Bright in its suave bounding-line, as,

Beneath half-watt rays,

The eyes turn topaz.





Meditatio

When I carefully consider the curious habits of dogs I am compelled to conclude

That man is the superior animal.

When I consider the curious habits of man I confess, my friend, I am puzzled.





Nicotine

Hymn to the Dope



Goddess of the murmuring courts,

Nicotine, my Nicotine,

Houri of the mystic sports,

trailing-robed in gabardine,

Gliding where the breath hath glided,

Hidden sylph of filmy veils,

Truth behind the dream is veiléd

E’en as thou art, smiling ever, ever gliding, Wraith of wraiths, dim lights dividing

Purple, grey, and shadow green

Goddess, Dream-grace, Nicotine.

Goddess of the shadow’s lights,

Nicotine, my Nicotine,

Some would set old Earth to rights,

Thou I none such ween.

Veils of shade our dream dividing,

Houris dancing, intergliding,

Wraith of wraiths and dream of faces,

Silent guardian of the old unhallowed places, Utter symbol of all old sweet druidings, Mem’ry of witched wold and green,

Nicotine, my Nicotine:

Neath the shadows of thy weaving

Dreams that need no undeceiving,

Loves that longer hold me not,

Dreams I dream not any more,

Fragrance of old sweet forgotten places, Smiles of dream-lit, flit-by faces

All as perfume Arab-sweet

Deck the high road to thy feet

As were Godiva’s coming fated

And all the April’s blush belated

Were lain before her, carpeting

The stones of Coventry with spring,

So thou my mist-enwreathéd queen,

Nicotine, white Nicotine,

Riding engloried in they hair

Mak’st by-road of our dreams

Thy thoroughfare.





Notes for Canto CXX

I have tried to write Paradise

Do not move

Let the wind speak

that is paradise.

Let the Gods forgive what I

have made

Let those I love try to forgive

what I have made.





Portrait d’une Femme

Your mind and you are our Sargasso Sea, London has swept about you this score years And bright ships left you this or that in fee: Ideas, old gossip, oddments of all things, Strange spars of knowledge and dimmed wares of price.

Great minds have sought you — lacking someone else.

You have been second always. Tragical?

No. You preferred it to the usual thing: One dull man, dulling and uxorious,

One average mind — with one thought less, each year.

Oh, you are patient, I have seen you sit Hours, where something might have floated up.

And now you pay one. Yes, you richly pay.

You are a person of some interest, one comes to you And takes strange gain away:

Trophies fished up; some curious suggestion; Fact that leads nowhere; and a tale for two, Pregnant with mandrakes, or with something else That might prove useful and yet never proves, That never fits a corner or shows use,

Or finds its hour upon the loom of days: The tarnished, gaudy, wonderful old work; Idols and ambergris and rare inlays,

These are your riches, your great store; and yet For all this sea-hoard of deciduous things, Strange woods half sodden, and new brighter stuff: In the slow float of differing light and deep, No! there is nothing! In the whole and all, Nothing that’s quite your own.

Yet this is you.





Quies

This is another of our ancient loves.

Pass and be silent, Rullus, for the day Hath lacked a something since this lady passed; Hath lacked a something. ‘Twas but marginal.





Salutation

O generation of the thoroughly smug

and thoroughly uncomfortable,

I have seen fishermen picnicking in the sun, I have seen them with untidy families,

I have seen their smiles full of teeth

and heard ungainly laughter.

And I am happier than you are,

And they were happier than I am;

And the fish swim in the lake

and do not even own clothing.





Sestina: Altaforte

Loquitur: En Bertrans de Born.

Dante Alighieri put this man in hell for that he was a stirrer-up of strife.

Eccovi!

Judge ye!

Have I dug him up again?

The scene in at his castle, Altaforte. “Papiols” is his jongleur.

“The Leopard,” the device of Richard (Cúur de Lion).

I

Damn it all! all this our South stinks peace.

You whoreson dog, Papiols, come! Let’s to music!

I have no life save when the swords clash.

But ah! when I see the standards gold, vair, purple, opposing And the broad fields beneath them turn crimson, Then howl I my heart nigh mad with rejoicing.

II

In hot summer have I great rejoicing

When the tempests kill the earth’s foul peace, And the lightnings from black heav’n flash crimson, And the fierce thunders roar me their music And the winds shriek through the clouds mad, opposing, And through all the riven skies God’s swords clash.

III

Hell grant soon we hear again the swords clash!

And the shrill neighs of destriers in battle rejoicing, Spiked breast to spiked breast opposing!

Better one hour’s stour than a year’s peace With fat boards, bawds, wine and frail music!

Bah! there’s no wine like the blood’s crimson!

IV

And I love to see the sun rise blood-crimson.

And I watch his spears through the dark clash And it fills all my heart with rejoicing And pries wide my mouth with fast music When I see him so scorn and defy peace, His lone might ‘gainst all darkness opposing.

V

The man who fears war and squats opposing My words for stour, hath no blood of crimson But is fit only to rot in womanish peace Far from where worth’s won and the swords clash For the death of such sluts I go rejoicing;



Yea, I fill all the air with my music.

VI

Papiols, Papiols, to the music!

There’s no sound like to swords swords opposing, No cry like the battle’s rejoicing

When our elbows and swords drip the crimson And our charges ‘gainst “The Leopard’s” rush clash.

May God damn for ever all who cry “Peace!”

VII

And let the music of the swords make them crimson!

Hell grant soon we hear again the swords clash!

Hell blot black for always the thought “Peace!”





Silet

When I behold how black, immortal ink

Drips from my deathless pen - ah, well-away!

Why should we stop at all for what I think?

There is enough in what I chance to say.

It is enough that we once came together; What is the use of setting it to rime?

When it is autumn do we get spring weather, Or gather may of harsh northwindish time?

It is enough that we once came together; What if the wind have turned against the rain?

It is enough that we once came together; Time has seen this, and will not turn again; And who are we, who know that last intent, To plague to-morrow with a testament!





Song

Winter is icummen in,

Lhude sing Goddamm,

Raineth drop and staineth slop,

and how the wind doth ramm,

Sing: Goddamm.

Skiddeth bus and sloppeth us,

An ague hath my ham.

Freezeth river, turneth liver,

Damn you, sing: Goddamm.

Goddamm, Goddamm, ‘tis why I am, Goddamm, So ‘gainst the winter’s balm.

Sing goddamm, damm, sing Goddamm,

Sing goddamm, sing goddamm, DAMM.





Song in the Manner of Housman

O woe, woe,

People are born and die,

We also shall be dead pretty soon

Therefore let us act as if we were

dead already.

The bird sits on the hawthorn tree

But he dies also, presently.

Some lads get hung, and some get shot.

Woeful is this human lot.

<i>Woe! woe, etcetera … .</i>

London is a woeful place,

Shropshire is much pleasanter.

Then let us smile a little space

Upon fond nature’s morbid grace.

<i>Oh, Woe, woe, woe, etcetera … </i>





Song of the Bowmen of Shu

Here we are, picking the first fern-shoots And saying: When shall we get back to our country?

Here we are because we have the Ken-nin for our foemen, We have no comfort because of these Mongols.

We grub the soft fern-shoots,

When anyone says “Return,” the others are full of sorrow.

Sorrowful minds, sorrow is strong, we are hungry and thirsty.

Our defence is not yet made sure, no one can let his friend return.

We grub the old fern-stalks.

We say: Will we be let to go back in October?

There is no ease in royal affairs, we have no comfort.

Our sorrow is bitter, but we would not return to our country.

What flower has come into blossom?

Whose chariot? The General’s.

Horses, his horses even, are tired. They were strong.

We have no rest, trhee battles a month.

By heavn, his horses are tired.

The generals are on them, the soldiers are by them.

The horses are well trained, the generals have ivory arrows and quivers ornamented with fish-skin.

The enemy is swift, we must be careful.

When we set out, the willows were drooping with spring, We come back in the snow,

We go slowly, we are hungry and thirsty, Our mind is full of sorrow, who will know of our grief?

<i>By Bunno, reputedly 1100 B. C.</i>





Statement of Being

I am a grave poetic hen

That lays poetic eggs

And to enhance my temperament

A little quiet begs.

We make the yolk philosophy,

True beauty the albumen.

And then gum on a shell of form

To make the screed sound human.





Sub Mare

It is, and is not, I am sane enough,

Since you have come this place has hovered round me, This fabrication built of autumn roses, Then there’s a goldish colour, different.

And one gropes in these things as delicate Algć reach up and out, beneath

Pale slow green surgings of the underwave, ‘Mid these things older than the names they have, These things that are familiears of the god.





Taking Leave of a Friend

Blue mountains to the north of the walls, White river winding about them;

Here we must make separation

And go out through a thousand miles of dead grass.

Mind like a floating wide cloud,

Sunset like the parting of old acquaintances Who bow over their clasped hands at a distance.

Our horses neigh to each others

as we are departing.





Tame Cat

It rests me to be among beautiful women Why should one always lie about such matters?

I repeat:

It rests me to converse with beautiful women Even though we talk nothing but nonsense, The purring of the invisible antennae

Is both stimulating and delightful.





The BathTub

As a bathtub lined with white porcelain, When the hot water gives out or goes tepid, So is the slow cooling of our chivalrous passion, O my much praised but-not-altogether-satisfactory lady.





The Encounter

All the while they were talking the new morality Her eyes explored me.

And when I rose to go

Her fingers were like the tissue

Of a Japanese paper napkin.





The Fault of It

Some may have blamed us that we cease to speak Of things we spoke of in our verses early, Saying: a lovely voice is such as such; Saying: that lady’s eyes were sad last week, Wherein the world’s whole joy is born and dies; Saying: she hath this way or that, this much Of grace, this way or that, this much

Of grace, this little misericorde;

Ask us no further word;

If we were proud, then proud to be so wise Ask us no more of all the things ye heard; We may not speak of them, they touch us nearly.





The Garden

En robe de parade. Samain

Like a skein of loose silk blown against a wall She walks by the railing of a path in Kensington Gardens, And she is dying piece-meal

Tof a sort of emotional anaemia.

And round about there is a rabble

Of the filthy, sturdy, unkillable infants of the very poor.

They shall inherit the earth.

In her is the end of breeding.

Her boredom is exquisite and excessive.

She would like some one to speak to her, And is almost afraid that I

Twill commit that indiscretion.





The Garret

Come, let us pity those who are better off than we are.

Come, my friend, and remember

that the rich have butlers and no friends, And we have friends and no butlers.

Come, let us pity the married and the unmarried.

Dawn enters with little feet

like a gilded Pavlova

And I am near my desire.

Nor has life in it aught better

Than this hour of clear coolness

the hour of waking together.





The Garrett

Come, let us pity those who are better off than we are.

Come, my friend, and remember

that the rich have butlers and no friends, And we have friends and no butlers.

Come, let us pity the married and the unmarried.

Dawn enters with little feet

like a gilded Pavlova

And I am near my desire.

Nor has life in it aught better

Than this hour of clear coolness

the hour of waking together.





The Jewel Stairs’ Grievance

The jewelled steps are already quite white with dew, It is so late that the dew soaks my gauze stockings, And I let down the crystal curtain

And watch the moon through the clear autumn.





The Lake Isle

O God, O Venus, O Mercury, patron of thieves, Give me in due time, I beseech you, a little tobacco-shop, With the little bright boxes

piled up neatly upon the shelves

And the loose fragment cavendish

and the shag,

And the bright Virginia

loose under the bright glass cases,

And a pair of scales

not too greasy,

And the votailles dropping in for a word or two in passing, For a flip word, and to tidy their hair a bit.

O God, O Venus, O Mercury, patron of thieves, Lend me a little tobacco-shop,

or install me in any profession

Save this damn’d profession of writing, where one needs one’s brains all the time.





The Logical Conclusion

Hi There! I see you’re enjoying the site, and just wanted to extend an invitiation to register for our free site. The members of oldpoetry strive to make this a fun place to learn and share - hope you join us! - Kevin





The Needle

Come, or the stellar tide will slip away.

Eastward avoid the hour of its decline, Now! for the needle trembles in my soul!

Here have we had the vantage, the good hour.

Here we have had our day, your day and mine.

Come now, before this power

That bears us up, shall turn against the pole.

Mock not the flood of stars, the thing’s to be.

O Love, come now, this land turns evil slowly.

The waves bore in, soon will they bear away.

The treasure is ours, make we fast land with it.

Move we and take the tide, with its next favour, Abide

Under some neutral force

Until this course turneth aside.





The Plunge

I would bathe myself in strangeness:

These comforts heaped upon me, smother me!

I burn, I scald so for the new,

New friends, new faces,

Places!

Oh to be out of this,

This that is all I wanted

- save the new.

And you,

Love, you the much, the more desired!

Do I not loathe all walls, streets, stones, All mire, mist, all fog,

All ways of traffic?

You, I wold have flow over me like water, Oh, but far out of this!

Grass, and low fields, and hills,

And sun,

Oh, sun enough!

Out, and alone, among some

Alien people!





The Return

See, they return; ah, see the tentative Movements, and the slow feet,

The trouble in the pace and the uncertain Wavering!

See, they return, one by one,

With fear, as half-awakened;

As if the snow should hesitate

And murmur in the wind,

and half turn back;

These were the “Wing’d-with-Awe,”

Inviolable.

Gods of the Wingčd shoe!

With them the silver hounds,

sniffing the trace of air!

Haie! Haie!

These were the swift to harry;

These the keen-scented;

These were the souls of blood.

Slow on the leash,

pallid the leash-men!





The River-Merchant’s Wife

While my hair was still cut straight across my forehead I played about the front gate, pulling flowers.

You came by on bamboo stilts, playing horse, You walked about my seat, playing with blue plums.

And we went on living in the village of Chokan: Two small people, without dislike or suspicion.

At fourteen I married My Lord you.

I never laughed, being bashful.

Lowering my head, I looked at the wall.

Called to, a thousand times, I never looked back.

At fifteen I stopped scowling,

I desired my dust to be mingled with yours Forever and forever and forever.

Why should I climb the lookout?

At sixteen you departed,

You went into far Ku-to-en, by the river of swirling eddies, And you have been gone five months.

The monkeys make sorrowful noise overhead.

You dragged your feet when you went out.

By the gate now, the moss is grown, the different mosses, Too deep to clear them away!

The leaves fall early this autumn, in wind.

The paired butterflies are already yellow with August Over the grass in the West garden;

They hurt me. I grow older.

If you are coming down through the narrows of the river Kiang, Please let me know beforehand,

And I will come out to meet you

As far as Cho-fo-Sa.





The River-Merchant’s Wife: A Letter

After Li Po

While my hair was still cut straight

across my forehead

I played at the front gate, pulling

flowers.

You came by on bamboo stilts, playing

horse,

You walked about my seat, playing with

blue plums.

And we went on living in the village of Chokan:

Two small people, without dislike or

suspicion.

At fourteen I married My Lord you.

I never laughed, being bashful.

Lowering my head, I looked at the wall.

Called to, a thousand times, I never

looked back.

At fifteen I stopped scowling,

I desired my dust to be mingled with

yours

Forever and forever and forever.

Why should I climb the lookout?

At sixteen you departed,

You went into far Ku-to-en, by the river of swirling eddies,

And you have been gone five months.

The monkeys make sorrowful noise

overhead.

You dragged your feet when you went

out,

By the gate now, the moss is grown,

the different mosses,

Too deep to clear them away!

The leaves fall early this autumn, in

wind.

The paired butterflies are already

yellow with August

Over the grass in the West garden;

They hurt me. I grow older.

If you are coming down through the

narrows of the river Kiang,

Please let me know beforehand,

And I will come out to meet you

As far as Cho-fu-sa.





Translated by



Anonymous submission.





The Seafarer

(From the early Anglo-Saxon text)

May I for my own self song’s truth reckon, Journey’s jargon, how I in harsh days

Hardship endured oft.

Bitter breast-cares have I abided,

Known on my keel many a care’s hold,

And dire sea-surge, and there I oft spent Narrow nightwatch nigh the ship’s head

While she tossed close to cliffs. Coldly afflicted, My feet were by frost benumbed.

Chill its chains are; chafing sighs

Hew my heart round and hunger begot

Mere-weary mood. Lest man know not

That he on dry land loveliest liveth,

List how I, care-wretched, on ice-cold sea, Weathered the winter, wretched outcast

Deprived of my kinsmen;

Hung with hard ice-flakes, where hail-scur flew, There I heard naught save the harsh sea And ice-cold wave, at whiles the swan cries, Did for my games the gannet’s clamour,

Sea-fowls, loudness was for me laughter, The mews’ singing all my mead-drink.

Storms, on the stone-cliffs beaten, fell on the stern In icy feathers; full oft the eagle screamed With spray on his pinion.

Not any protector

May make merry man faring needy.

This he little believes, who aye in winsome life Abides ‘mid burghers some heavy business, Wealthy and wine-flushed, how I weary oft Must bide above brine.

Neareth nightshade, snoweth from north, Frost froze the land, hail fell on earth then Corn of the coldest. Nathless there knocketh now The heart’s thought that I on high streams The salt-wavy tumult traverse alone.

Moaneth alway my mind’s lust

That I fare forth, that I afar hence

Seek out a foreign fastness.

For this there’s no mood-lofty man over earth’s midst, Not though he be given his good, but will have in his youth greed; Nor his deed to the daring, nor his king to the faithful But shall have his sorrow for sea-fare

Whatever his lord will.

He hath not heart for harping, nor in ring-having Nor winsomeness to wife, nor world’s delight Nor any whit else save the wave’s slash, Yet longing comes upon him to fare forth on the water.

Bosque taketh blossom, cometh beauty of berries, Fields to fairness, land fares brisker,



All this admonisheth man eager of mood, The heart turns to travel so that he then thinks On flood-ways to be far departing.

Cuckoo calleth with gloomy crying,

He singeth summerward, bodeth sorrow,

The bitter heart’s blood. Burgher knows not —

He the prosperous man — what some perform Where wandering them widest draweth.

So that but now my heart burst from my breast-lock, My mood ‘mid the mere-flood,

Over the whale’s acre, would wander wide.

On earth’s shelter cometh oft to me,

Eager and ready, the crying lone-flyer, Whets for the whale-path the heart irresistibly, O’er tracks of ocean; seeing that anyhow My lord deems to me this dead life

On loan and on land, I believe not

That any earth-weal eternal standeth

Save there be somewhat calamitous

That, ere a man’s tide go, turn it to twain.

Disease or oldness or sword-hate

Beats out the breath from doom-gripped body.

And for this, every earl whatever, for those speaking after —

Laud of the living, boasteth some last word, That he will work ere he pass onward,

Frame on the fair earth ‘gainst foes his malice, Daring ado, …

So that all men shall honour him after

And his laud beyond them remain ‘mid the English, Aye, for ever, a lasting life’s-blast,

Delight mid the doughty.

Days little durable,

And all arrogance of earthen riches,

There come now no kings nor Cćsars

Nor gold-giving lords like those gone.

Howe’er in mirth most magnified,

Whoe’er lived in life most lordliest,

Drear all this excellence, delights undurable!

Waneth the watch, but the world holdeth.

Tomb hideth trouble. The blade is layed low.

Earthly glory ageth and seareth.

No man at all going the earth’s gait,

But age fares against him, his face paleth, Grey-haired he groaneth, knows gone companions, Lordly men are to earth o’ergiven,

Nor may he then the flesh-cover, whose life ceaseth, Nor eat the sweet nor feel the sorry,

Nor stir hand nor think in mid heart,

And though he strew the grave with gold, His born brothers, their buried bodies

Be an unlikely treasure hoard.





The Seeing Eye

The small dogs look at the big dogs;

They observe unwieldy dimensions

And curious imperfections of odor.

Here is the formal male group:

The young men look upon their seniors,

They consider the elderly mind

And observe its inexplicable correlations.

Said Tsin-Tsu:

It is only in small dogs and the young

That we find minute observation





The Summons

I can not bow to woo thee

With honey words and flower kisses

And the dew of sweet half-truths

Fallen on the grass of old quaint love-tales Of broidered days foredone.

Nor in the murmurous twilight

May I sit below thee,

Worshiping in whispers

Tremulous as far-heard bells.

All these things have I known once

And passed

In that gay youth I had but yester-year.

And that is gone

As the shadow of wind.

Nay, I can not woo thee thus;

But as I am ever swept upward

To the centre of all truth

So must I bear thee with me

Rapt into this great involving flame,

Calling ever from the midst thereof,

“Follow! Follow!”

And in the glory of our meeting

Shall the power be reborn.

And together in the midst of this power Must we, each outstriving each,

Cry eternally:

“I come, go thou yet further.”

And again, “Follow,”

For we may not tarry.





The Tree

I stood still and was a tree amid the wood, Knowing the truth of things unseen before; Of Daphne and the laurel bow

And that god-feasting couple old

that grew elm-oak amid the wold.

‘Twas not until the gods had been

Kindly entreated, and been brought within Unto the hearth of their heart’s home

That they might do this wonder thing;

Nathless I have been a tree amid the wood And many a new thing understood

That was rank folly to my head before.





These Fought in Any Case

These fought in any case,

and some believing

pro domo, in any case …..

Died some, pro patria,

walked eye-deep in hell

believing in old men’s lies, then unbelieving came home, home to a lie,

home to many deceits,

home to old lies and new infamy;

usury age-old and age-thick

and liars in public places.

Daring as never before, wastage as never before.

Young blood and high blood,

fair cheeks, and fine bodies;

fortitude as never before

frankness as never before,

disillusions as never told in the old days, hysterias, trench confessions,

laughter out of dead bellies.





Ts’ai Chi’h

The petals fall in the fountain,

the orange-coloured rose-leaves,

Their ochre clings to the stone.





Villanelle: The Psychological Hour

I had over prepared the event,

that much was ominous.

With middle-ageing care

I had laid out just the right books.

I had almost turned down the pages.

Beauty is so rare a thing.

So few drink of my fountain.

So much barren regret,

So many hours wasted!

And now I watch, from the window,

the rain, the wandering busses.

“Their little cosmos is shaken” -

the air is alive with that fact.

In their parts of the city

they are played on by diverse forces.

How do I know?

Oh, I know well enough.

For them there is something afoot.

As for me;

I had over-prepared the event -

Beauty is so rare a thing.

So few drink of my fountain.

Two friends: a breath of the forest…

Friends? Are people less friends

because one has just, at last, found them?

Twice they promised to come.

“Between the night and the morning?”

Beauty would drink of my mind.

Youth would awhile forget

my youth is gone from me.



(Speak up! You have danced so stiffly?

Someone admired your works,

And said so frankly.

“Did you talk like a fool,

The first night?

The second evening?”

“But they promised again:

‘To-morrow at tea-time’.”)



Now the third day is here -

no word from either;




No word from her nor him,

Only another man’s note:

“Dear Pound, I am leaving England.”





Villonaud for This Yule

Towards the Noel that morte saison

<i>(Christ make the shepherds’ homage dear!)</i>

Then when the grey wolves everychone

Drink of the winds their chill small-beer And lap o’ the snows food’s gueredon

Then makyth my heart his yule-tide cheer <i>(Skoal! with the dregs if the clear be gone!)</i>

Wineing the ghosts of yester-year.

Ask ye what ghost I dream upon?

<i>(What of the magians’ scented gear?)</i>

The ghosts of dead loves everyone

That make the stark winds reek with fear Lest love return with the foison sun

And slay the memories that me cheer

<i>(Such as I drink to mine fashion)</i>

Wineing the ghosts of yester-year.

Where are the joys my heart had won?

<i>(Saturn and Mars to Zeus drawn near!)</i>

Where are athe lips mine lay upon,

Aye! where are the glances feat and clear That bade my heart his valor don?

I skoal to the eyes as grey-blown meer

<i>(Who knows whose was that paragon?)</i>

Wineing the ghosts of yester-year.

Prince: ask me not what I have done

Nor what God hath that can me cheer

But ye ask first where the winds are gone Wineing the ghosts of yester-year.





